I remember playing musical statues with friends at one of my early birthday parties, at my nanna's. The prize was a Galaxy bar, but I didn't win. So I went into the coat cupboard and sat there fuming. Being common is how I managed to remain sane. When everything took off for me, when I was 12, I started going to phenomenal restaurants and I'd ask for chicken with lines on. I'd grown up on microwave chips, chicken nuggets and chicken with lines on, which is what I called chargrilled chicken. Sunday breakfast in Cardiff as a child was Cheerios and cartoons, then church with nanna. My revolt was to sneak in sweets. Having to get sweets from the pocket, into the mouth and chew without getting caught kept my brain active. I'd steal coins off my uncle to buy the sweets at the corner shop. He knows about it. After I sang at the Vatican Christmas concert, I was invited to a huge Vatican banquet somewhere incredibly opulent with gold cutlery. They brought a peacock to the table – head intact, wobbling. I said, "No way am I eating that!" I moved out of my parents' house at 16 – all I could cook was stir fries. Then I graduated to making breaded chicken in a wrap. That's when I was living in the flat below Billie Piper. We went for so many Nando's that I can't go there any more. I had a horrible time once, singing to a load of bankers as they ate. Princess Anne was there too. I'd just come back from Chamonix and was hungover. I was doing a perfectly fine job singing, but they went on talking and eating – ignored me. I was like, "Who the hell are you to be like this? And why is Anne here?" My children are six and five and would devour chicken nuggets if offered, but are vegan at school. It's a Rudolf Steiner. They have hummus, muesli, soup, vegetables, and take in their own bread. Anything they eat at home I cook from fresh. It's interesting how moody young humans get when they're hungry – when I was breastfeeding my children, one thing I saw was mardiness. I know a lot of adults, particularly men, who are ruled by their bellies and get unpleasant if they're hungry. My partner's a good cook, more experimental than I am. So it can sometimes go quite wrong. But one of the best meals he's ever made is a bobotie – curried lamb and fruit baked with an eggy topping. It's incredible. EP Four, the next instalment of Charlotte Church's five-EP set, is released in March