Intense is the best way to describe the first time I walked barefoot outside. Every step sent new sensations through my feet and toes. It was exhilarating. I started almost by accident. I was training for a half-marathon in spring 2010 and I kept picking up injuries. Every time I went for a jog, my joints ached. I stumbled on the idea that running without shoes is better for your bones. The first time I tried it, I found that my joints didn't hurt afterwards. But my soles did. So I decided to go barefoot all day every day for a fortnight, to toughen up the skin. I went everywhere without shoes: shops, pubs, galleries, work meetings. The pain disappeared and instead it started to feel as if my feet were constantly being given an amazing massage. I'd look forward to walking on different surfaces – I especially love the texture of the white paint on zebra crossings. Every street suddenly felt rich and alive. After those two weeks, I put on shoes again and my feet felt imprisoned. I decided there and then I'd go barefoot for good. It's been so liberating. It feels as if you're at one with the world. Every path and pavement is different and exciting. I go to the Peak District sometimes. The rocks there are best, because you feel as if your feet are moulding round them. My friends aren't convinced. They worry I might injure myself, but I explain I'm happy this way. I told my doctor and he was completely supportive. He said there was no medical reason I shouldn't, as long as I was careful. I was never a huge shoe fan anyway. I had maybe a dozen pairs. I gave a couple to some friends. I offered a homeless man some trainers. I work from home, so there's no problem with going to an office. I tell new clients ahead of meeting them. None has ever had an issue. If you do a job well, it doesn't matter what's on your feet. People in Sheffield, where I live, barely mention it. The most common thing I get asked is if I know I'm not wearing shoes. I'm often tempted to look down and say, "Oh, no! I knew I'd forgotten something." But I just explain that, for me, bare feet are happy and comfortable feet. Some say they wish they were brave enough to do the same. Think about it: at home or on holiday, what's the first thing you do? Kick off your shoes. This is an extension of that. Yes, I've stepped in glass and dog dirt. You learn to scan your surroundings to avoid accidents, but they happen. Your soles are tough, though. The glass was painful, but it didn't do any real damage. With dog mess, I just wipe my feet on grass and then wash them at a tap. Some bouncers won't let me into bars or restaurants, so I have created this little strappy bow that I stick to the top of my feet. Then it looks as if I'm wearing sandals and no one says anything. I think I was wearing that when I met my partner. When I explained I lived barefoot he was taken aback. It's not something you come across every day. But he's accepted it. I knew he was a keeper when he gave it a go on a trip to the shops last summer. At the National Gallery, they asked me to put on shoes or leave. When I asked why, they said it was disrespectful. I have no idea how. And when I visited the 9-11 memorial in New York, they wouldn't let me in. I wanted to go, so I bought some flip-flops. It felt strange. I have two children aged nine and seven. It's their decision if they go barefoot, too. Sometimes they do, mainly not. People don't generally comment, but we were in town once and a social worker started asking questions. I felt shaken, but I understand the importance of making sure children are cared for properly. They wear shoes to school. As winter comes round, it gets more challenging, but I adapt and wear thermal leggings. My feet look good. I paint my nails and the street gives me a sort of pedicure. The weirdest thing was when a fetish group saw me in the local paper. They asked me to send them pictures of my feet. I was open to it, but asked for £30 a photo; they wanted them for free. Some people take photos on their phone. I like the idea that I can make one or two people realise you don't have to conform to every social norm. It's been four years now, and I think my feet will stay bare. It just feels right.• As told to Colin Drury. Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com