Despite the name, you’re more likely to find these delicate webs of nuts and candied fruit in a French patisserie than an Italian pasticceria. They look simple enough, but when the normally calm Delia Smith is moved to hyperbole such as: “If there was a prize for the very best biscuit in the world, one bite of a florentine would tell you this was the winner,” (and this in the face of the chocolate chip cookie and the digestive), you know you’re on to something special. Baking guru Annie Bell introduces the recipe in her Baking Bible with the ominous words: “Florentines aren’t the simplest of biscuits, which is why I tend not to go overboard on making them.” If Bell thinks they’re hard to master, is there any hope for mere mortals? This is key to a successful florentine. The base mixture must bind the other ingredients together without weighing them down or leaving them soggy – a good florentine should shatter between your teeth. Most recipes melt together butter and sugar, with Mary Berry also adding golden syrup, the Bouchon Bakery cookbook glucose syrup and Annie Bell honey. Though I’m not convinced these sticky extras make much difference, I do like the crunch and flavour of Berry’s demerara sugar in contrast to the usual caster. Rose Prince’s Pocket Bakery, Geraldene Holt’s Cakes and Smith all use double cream as well, to create a rich caramel. I find the former’s mixture a little bit wet even after prolonged baking, so it’s probably best not to go overboard with the stuff, but it does wonders for the flavour. Bouchon Bakery gets characteristically geeky and calls for me to heat together milk, sugar, glucose and honey to 120C before pouring them on to the fruit and nut mixture. The results certainly set as firm as brittle, but it is an awful lot of faff when a better-tasting caramel can be made in minutes by following any of the other recipes. That said, there is a good reason in their case, because this mixture sits on top of a blind-baked pâte sucrée base (perhaps the most delicious pastry I’ve ever made), “which makes the cookies much easier to pick up and eat, and makes them more substantial too” – and the whole lot then has to be turned upside down to be gilded with chocolate. Lesser florentines might crumble under the pressure, but not the Bouchon Bakery version; I reckon I could tile my roof with the things (if there was anything left of them but crumbs). I’m not going to go down this route, though. Although I hesitate to quibble with the great Thomas Keller, I have no idea why you would want to make such a delicate confection more substantial. One of the joys of the florentine is its lacy lightness, which deceives the greedy eater into consuming more than is strictly necessary. You certainly couldn’t eat two Bouchon versions by accident. Others use flour too, but to a lesser extent; the more you put in, the more they start to resemble a cookie. Berry’s, though lovely, are almost soft in the middle because she uses equal parts butter, sugar and flour. This makes them easier to work with, but I think Holt’s more parsimonious amount yields a crisper texture, more akin to the florentines I’ve scoffed in France. Yotam Ottolenghi and Sami Tamimi go down a different route altogether in their first book, binding the florentines with nothing more than egg white and icing sugar. They’re very crisp, very good and very quick, but without the caramel flavour and slightly sticky, chewy texture, they’re not what I’m after here. The easiest way to create a solid base for your florentine without the use of pastry is to be free with the flaked almonds, as Berry, Bell, Prince and Ottolenghi and Tamimi recommend. At the risk of making a rod for my own back, the slivered, blanched kind that Holt and the Bouchon Bakery prefer give a less even and more interesting texture. Prince also uses cobnuts, which is an excellent idea while they’re in season, as they are at the moment, and Berry uses the pleasantly bitter walnut. My favourite year-round addition is Bouchon’s pistachios, which add a flash of colour in the absence of Holt and Smith’s candied angelica, which I was unable to procure in time. (This traditional favourite seems to have been abandoned by shops in favour of edible glitter and mini marshmallows, but it is still available online.) The fruit is a matter of personal preference, but I like the bitter citrus flavour of candied peel, the jammy sweetness and seedy crunch of Prince’s dried figs, and Berry’s sour cranberries. Sour dried cherries would also work well – indeed, far better than the glace sort used in many of the recipes, which, like sultanas, are sugar overkill. Feel free to mix and match. Prince writes of her “nude” florentines that “without the chocolate, the caramelised nuts and fruit flavours are better appreciated”, and I’m inclined to agree. But, as the classic recipe demands it, I’ll come down on the side of dark chocolate as a bitter contrast to the sweet topping, rather than Bell’s white, which I find too sweet. I do like her generosity with it, however; two layers are definitely better than one. Florentines demand a careful eye, both going in and coming out of the oven. It is essential to flatten them as thin as possible on the baking tray, rather than letting them spread out on their own, as Berry seems to suggest, or you’ll end up with little puffy biscuits that, without her liberal way with the flour, will struggle to hold together. Make sure you spread them well apart too, to expand further in the heat. You’ll also need to keep an eagle eye on them once they’re in the oven. While undercooking florentines will leave you with a tray of disintegrating disasters, going too far in the other direction will spoil the flavour, so it is essential to catch them at just the right point. Be patient enough to leave them to cool before anointing them with chocolate. Whether you wait for that to cool too is between you and your conscience. (Makes 18) 45g butter 60g demerara sugar 60g candied peel, chopped 45g dried cranberries or sour cherries, roughly chopped 45g soft dried figs, roughly chopped 20g pistachio kernels, roughly chopped 60g blanched almonds, cut into slivers 15g plain flour Pinch of salt 1 tbsp double cream 200g dark chocolate, broken into pieces Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas mark four and line two baking trays with lightly greased parchment paper. Melt the butter and sugar together in a pan over a medium heat until combined. Put the fruit and nuts in a bowl, sift over the flour and toss together until the flour is evenly distributed. Take the pan off the heat and stir in the salt and cream, then stir into the fruit and nuts. Dollop rounded teaspoons of the mixture on to the baking trays and flatten out as much as possible without leaving holes, making sure they are well spaced out on the trays. Bake for about 10-12 minutes until golden brown all over, then leave to cool on the tray. When cool, melt half the chocolate in a heatproof bowl set over a pan of simmering water, making sure it doesn’t touch the water. Stir occasionally until liquid. Carefully dip the underside of each florentine in the chocolate and leave to cool and set, then repeat. If you want to be really authentic, you can use a fork to make a wavy pattern in the setting chocolate at this point. Leave to harden completely before serving or storing in an air-tight box. Florentines: are they the best biscuit ever, or does their lack of dunkability disqualify them? Which other stalwarts of the French patisserie would you like to be able to make at home?